We just discussed hashing out passwords now hashing a password and storing the hash is more secure than
just directly storing a password in plain text.
But there is still a very big security hole with this approach.
So in this video we're going to discuss what that security hole is and how to fix it.
The first thing I want you to understand about this a little exploit and what we've discussed so far
is that many users out there end up using some really common passwords.
In other words different users use the same password very frequently.
So chances are there are like millions of people out there today who use the password of password all
over the place.
Or one two three four five six or monkey or 30 or whatever else.
So many different people use the same password.
With that in mind a malicious user could exploit this kind of hashing setup that we put together by
using something called a rainbow table attack but a rainbow table attack is is where a malicious user
is going to get a list of all of those very common passwords.
So maybe they've got a list of like 1000 of the most common passwords or even a hundred thousand they're
then going to sit down and for every single one of those passwords they're going to compute the respective
hash a build up this little lookup table then where they know that the hash of like 0 0 0 situates is
what is produced by running monkey at three hashing algorithm.
So they've got this very easy look up to go between a hash and a very specific password.
So how is this relevant.
Well imagine what would happen if a user a malicious user then got access to all the passwords that
we have stored inside of our users not just on file in a Hash format.
So these might be the passwords that we are storing in a very simple hash format right here.
A malicious user would then go through this list of hash passwords they would look at each one one by
one and they would check to see if there is a corresponding hash stored inside of this table.
So they would say OK do I have any hash stored equal to S.B. 3 blah blah blah.
They would then look through all these different hashes and I'd say nope don't have it.
OK.
Do I have a hash of it see 68.
Nope don't have it.
Do I have a hash of 0 0 see 2 8 5.
Whoa look at that 0 0 2 8 5.
That means that the person with that hash right there that must be the hash version of the password
monkey.
And so now a malicious user would know that the person with this password and their specific e-mail
which is readable in plain text inside of our database has a password of monkey so with the rainbow
table attack even though a user or a malicious user cannot go from a hash to a password they can do
all this kind of free computing work up front and then use that to kind of backtrack or back calculate
what all of our different users passwords were.
Now of course in some cases users might have passwords hash that are completely unpredictable.
In other words a malicious user would probably not have an entry inside this table with a password entry
of like my pass blah Ludlow Lao word or something like that.
So if we have a user with a sufficiently random password this remote table attack would probably not
work against it.
But if a user is using these very common passwords.
Oh yeah definitely we could be vulnerable to this rainbow table attack approach so that's this remote
table attack.
How are we going to defend against it.
Well this is where we're going to add in one additional step to our password storage process.
So here's what we're going to do.
We're going to add in an additional random string of characters to every password that we hash called
a salt.
So whenever we are about to throw a password through a hashing algorithm we're going to add in this
randomly generated string of characters every single time a user signs up.
We're going to give every different user a very different salt or a random string of characters.
So we're going to append these two things together.
So we will end up with something like my password.
Blah blah blah like so
and then throw this really big string right here through our hashing algorithm and we'll still get out
a hash as we usually would.
So now the net result of this is that if someone wanted to build up a rainbow table to use against this
approach well they would have to do way more work because now not only would they have to compute the
hash for monkey.
It would also have to compute the hash for just about every possible derivation or extension of monkey
as well so they would also have to find the hash of say monkey plus some random stream characters and
they would have to do it again for monkey plus some other random string of characters and I'd do it
again for monkey and some yet other random string of characters and so just by adding on that random
string of characters we make it much harder for someone to attack us with this remote table attack but
even then there is a downside to this approach and that is well when a user comes back to our application
and they try to add in their power give us their password and we try to verify it.
How are we then going to use this same kind of approach to decide whether or not the correct password
has been supplied.
Because the salt that gets added in isn't visible to the user.
So essentially when the user signs up we are taking their password.
We're going to add in that random string of characters and then store the hash of that so the hash is
going to be some random string of characters like that when a user comes back and signs in and they
provide just that password.
How are we going to somehow generate the same hash to verify that it really is the correct password.
So this is where things get just slightly slightly complicated but don't worry.
Take a look at a quick diagram and of course we're going to eventually write out all this stuff in code
ourselves manually.
We're not going to use any library for the salting process so we'll definitely get a really good idea
of how this works at the end of the day.
But let's take a look at a diagram and understand how we're still going to figure out whether or not
a user entered the correct password.
So here's the idea.
When a user first signs up we're still going to take their password.
We're going to generate a random salt.
We're gonna join the two together run it through a hashing algorithm and inside of our database we're
going to store two different things inside of this password field.
We're going to store the hashed password plus the salt so in other words the combination of the password
plus the random salt we just generated then just gonna put a little separator character in there.
So like a period or a slash or a plus or a dash or basically whatever we want some kind of separator
character and then on the other side that little separator we're going to paste in that random salt
so whatever random salt we just generated we're going to store in essentially plaintext inside of our
database so our database is recording not only the hashed password plus the salt but the random salt
as well so then whenever some user comes back to sign in we're going to take a look at the email they
provided.
We're gonna look up that email inside of our database and we'll find this text right here.
Well then separate the hashed password plus salt and the random salt based upon that little separator
character.
So the period where the slash or the plus or whatever else.
So now we know what the original hash password plus salt is and we know exactly what the random salt
is as well.
So we're going to take that random salt salt that is stored inside of our database and join it up with
the password that the user just entered were then going to hash the Password Plus the salt together
and we should get out the exact same hash password plus salt that we generated originally and so we
can once again see if those two things match and if they do well then the correct original password
must have been supplied and whenever you first look at this process the first thing that comes to mind
for a lot of people is wait a minute if we're just storing the random salt inside the database isn't
that a security hole.
Well no not really.
Because remember whenever we join the password the salt and hash it there's no way to figure out like
where the password begins and where the salt begins.
When we run those two things together through the hashing algorithm there's no telling what is really
generating that hash.
So at the end of the day having just the salt alone is really worthless.
So it doesn't supply anything or give any hint whatsoever to a malicious user so that's it.
That's the general idea.
That's how we're going to store our passwords securely.
It's how we're going to make sure that we don't have our passwords in plain text and that's how we're
going to make sure that we don't fall into the trap of a rainbow table attack as you can imagine.
This is going to be at some slightly complicated code to be honest it's really not the worst thing in
the world at the end of the day we're only going to write out about like 20 lines or so to implement
all the stuff we've discussed so far.
And those 20 lines a lot of it are just gonna be like New Line characters and whatnot some spacing stuff.
So it really is not the worst thing.
So let's take a pause right here.
We'll come back the next video and we'll start to implement this hashing and salting process for our
sign up and our sign in flows.